should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
the link between violent video games and
aggression is pretty damn
um
minimal what as appears to be the case
is that more aggressive boys like more
aggressive video games and there's not
much of a causal Loop there you know a
lot of this identity confusion that I
see among adolescents in let's say high
junior high high school and University
looks to me like late manifestation of
pretend play that should have occurred
at about the age of three I'm
particularly concerned like as you said
about about video games not so much
because as you said of the content but
because of how they out compete some of
these other more traditional
nourishments one of the most effective
ways that we can kind of win in the in
the capitalist system is to deliver
something that is hyper stimulating
that's very cheap if junk food is is
flavor to ours from nutrition then uh
pornography is sexuality divorced from
the context of relationships video games
are thrilled divorced from physicality
and they can play all day without any
self-regulation from having to you know
the physical demands of actual Rough and
Tumble play they can practice shooting
and running and jumping and all the
things that you know I did as a kid
um actually physically it's not that bad
necessarily on its own the problem is
that it's so easily out competes the
actual
the actual thing that we need which is
the real physical play
[Music]
hello everybody I'm speaking today on
matters psychological and practical I
suppose and hopefully also while
entertaining and fun as well as
appropriately serious I'm talking to
Rafe Kelly today who
heads an organization called evolve move
and play and
um I'm very interested have been very
interested for a long time in the role
of play in the integration and
regulation
well not only of aggression but also in
the fostering of pro-social behavior at
an embodied level and there's a
literature that has emerged over the
last several decades indicating that
Rough and Tumble play in particular is
important for kids at very early
developmental stages
probably from
six months
up to
well who knows up to what level
uh till you're old and then that pretend
play which scaffolds in on top of that
is also of
primary significance in the
development of the ability to act in a
truly reciprocal and social manner a
manner also that simultaneously Fosters
development so we're going to talk about
that today so Rafe why don't we start
with a bit of your background huh yeah
what do you feel people in on on you
know your educational background your
interests and all that then we'll start
talking about getting more to the nuts
and bolts of play
yeah I think given that you started with
kind of rough and tumble play it'd be
good to start with my Early Childhood so
I was diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia
at an early age and my dad had had
similar learning disabilities that he'd
really struggled with I was kind of
raised in that counterculture so my dad
wanted to just take me out of the school
system and just unschool me
and my mom didn't so there's a big
conflict there and my dad kind of
reacted to that by just sort of pulling
away from me and sort of emotionally
neglecting me so I was acting out in
school and getting in lots of fist
fights
um and I I got introduced to the martial
arts when I was six years old and that
started helping me learn to regulate my
emotions and then I had a mentor who
came into my life who actually took over
my education and started homeschooling
me after uh going into fourth grade
and he did a few things that were really
helpful to me he you know let me spend
you know just two hours a day doing
homework and then the rest of the day I
would be out running in the woods but he
also did Rough and Tumble play with me
extensively pretty much every day and so
we would wrestle all the time and that
became incredibly healing for me so
through the martial arts and through
rough and double play very early on I
experienced that physical practices
could have this really transformative
effect on me how old were you when that
started that that Rough and Tumble play
yeah so my dad did a lot of rough and
tumble play with me when I was little
but then there was that period where it
was more neglectful in our relationship
than this the second Mentor who came
into my life came into my life when I
was eight years old
eight yeah yeah well that that you you
pointed out something very interesting
there with regard to your father I mean
I've actually seen that pattern in many
families you know and it seems so for
example I've seen within my own extended
family thinking of one couple in
particular where
every time the father attempted to
involve himself in the discipline let's
say which is really the attention and
regulation of his son his wife would in
small ways and not so small interfere
yeah in a in a rather punitive manner
um treating her husband as if his
his interaction his involvement was both
inappropriate inappropriate ignorant and
dangerous something like that
combination and my experience with that
has been that what men usually do in
that situation is pull away
yeah and that's really devastating for
the kids
you know what like the mother has to put
up a bit of a barrier because there
should be a little tension between the
parents about how the kids should be
treated and the mothers tend to be more
prone to provide security and comfort
and fathers to provide
uh encouragement and Challenge and
getting that exactly right really
depends on the temperament of the
parents and the temperament of the child
and so there has to be some tension but
it's unbelievably easy for
women to be overprotective of their
children enough to stop fathers from
interacting and then what often happens
as a consequence of that is the women
then ask themselves why the hell the
father is more involved with the kids
and
often the answer to that not always but
often is well you punished it out of
existence every time the father stepped
forward to take an interest you put up a
barrier that was non-trivial a moral
barrier often and you do that a hundred
times yeah that's that yeah so anyways
that's that's a that's a common pattern
and so but you had a lot of interactions
with your dad when you were young very
yeah I had a very good relationship with
my dad my dad's a really interesting and
creative person he uh he's a famous uh
natural Builder
um and he was very playful with me when
I was young he's a really yeah
interesting person that way but he you
know he's a member of the counterculture
he grew up you know my father was
actually
um
in jail during my mom's pregnancy first
selling marijuana so there was real
conflict my mom had reason to be
protective in some sense and my dad was
was struggling with with some of those
things but he and I have a great
relationship now but it did set me up
for this this sort of crisis at a very
early age that then was resolved through
through getting access to Rough and
Tumble play and then epic literature
which was also really important to me
yeah so this guy that the guy that
started to to play with you when you
were eight how did that come about and
why did your mother and father uh
encourage that or even allow it because
that's also a place where you know
people can be skeptical
yeah
um yeah there's a whole story there but
basically we we rented land so my my dad
owned uh 12 acres there was a kind of a
hippie commune and so we just rented a
space to this um couple it was two men
who'd moved in and
um my mom was desperate for her
babysitters and he offered himself as a
babysitter and then over time we just
got uh closer and closer and
um so when when my mom took me out of
school initially she was going to do
some of the homeschooling and then over
time it was like the demands on her for
taking care of the family financially
and taking care of my little sister uh
were sufficient that it was very
difficult for her and he was just there
and you know was willing to do it and so
that's kind of how that that worked out
so
um what I wanted to share was that as as
I kind of then developed I was in
I was in this register Circle which is a
kind of Native American religious group
in my early my late late childhood early
teens and there were a lot of other
young kids there who's you know whose
families were part of it there were two
three four years old and so by the time
I was 12 I started really being kind of
just being asked to to babysit these
younger kids and I noticed that they all
had this incredible hunger for a rough
and humble play it was like this deep
unmet need that I was seeing in children
everywhere and so I started just being
the guy who would rough house with kids
um at any social Gathering and then
people started asking me to come over
when I was 13 uh one of my closest
friends died unfortunately after a bike
accident he had his spleen taken out and
he didn't get soda properly so he
hemorrhaged out but he had a
six-year-old brother and his brother uh
started having a hard time falling
asleep after he passed away because he
used to rough house with his older
brother every night before bed so his
mom called me and asked me to come over
a couple nights a week and just rough
house with this kid so that he could
sleep and so I developed a really close
relationship with him kind of through
that same relationship so I get to kind
of step into that role
um in facilitating rough and double play
for younger children starting as a young
kid and then I went on to work as a
mentor for kids and my teens and then
um and then I became a gymnastics coach
so independently I'd also developed just
an interest in general athleticism and I
started coaching gymnastics and again I
had these young crazy boys with tons of
energy and found that they they really
just wanted someone who was willing to
wrestle with them
and so I've I I've kind of done that
repeatedly and I've really seen how
how
much of an impact that can have and so
when I
I first came across the play research
through a man named Frank Francis in his
book The exuberant animal and I started
digging into it behind that and then
came into Stuart Brown's work and I'm
not sure if you're familiar with Stuart
brown but Stuart Brown
was a psychological researcher as well
and he was looking specifically at spree
Killers people who go out and kill a lot
of people in one go and he was looking
for any kind of common trait in their
development that uh that would explain
this pattern and what he founded was
actually
um inhibition of play that if you look
at sprinklers I almost always were
prevented by their parents from playing
their parents treated play as as
unnecessary and as something that had to
be restricted and that this he believed
was the center of that and then through
Stuart Brown I became aware of Jacques
pencil's work
so later when I came into uh to your
work and started listening to you talk
about Yak Pink's up and the Rats I was
like oh yeah this is it and then
obviously you've written that paper on
rough and Temple play in the regulation
of aggression and that that paper was
just like yes absolutely for me because
I you know I was put in detention when I
was in second grade because I actually
bounced a kid's head off the concrete
and like bust his nose open
um
and and it was only because someone was
willing to go really deep with me into
that intense physical play that I was
able to uh let go of of that need to
express the aggression in the actual
social situation and to to
develop empathy that's what I think is
so incredible about you know what you've
talked about and what I've seen is that
we think that it's like just mocking out
combat and building the skills of combat
but actually what you're really doing is
learning the dance of recognizing how
your touch and the way that you move
with somebody
um how that plays out in them and then
that's that that kind of really building
ground mirroring yeah yeah well there's
um I have a great paper on my
personality course website by uh
on the hypothalamus the Name Escapes me
at the moment of the author but it'll
come back but it's on the hypothalamus
people can go to my psychology 230
website on my on my home website Under
courses and uh the gentleman who wrote
that paper who's a real genius
basically put a physiological scaffold
underneath uh
um Jean Piaget's ideas about the
expansion of reflex and so you know we
think of empathy as something like
theory of mind yeah knowing that I can
understand your pain but that isn't and
then and it's conceptual but that isn't
really how it works because you use your
body as a platform to to run simulations
of other people I got a friend when I
was a kid and he didn't have a father
and he used to come over when this was
before I was in grade six my dad
actually stepped in sort of as a
surrogate father for him and I used to
wrestle with this friend of mine and
every time I wrestled I got hurt he'd
stick his thumb in my eye or some damn
thing it was really awkward physically
you know and I realized even at that age
it was because he didn't he didn't know
how to play and that dance that you
describe
of that's that's part and parcel of
extended Rough and Tumble play
the reason it develops empathy is
because while you're wrestling and
playing in that physical manner
you get to see first of all where you
get hurt you know how far you can be
extended and how far you can be pushed
until the excitement and challenge turns
into pain and there's a limit there and
you want to actually play right up to
that limit which is the exciting limit
and then you learn that that's true of
you and another person but you learn it
you know right to the edge of your
fingertips you learn it about your legs
you learn it about your back you you
have to learn that about your entire
body or you can't map someone else onto
you because you don't know how it feels
well that's a fundamental issue you
don't know how it feels and so in that
Rough and Tumble play You're you're
laying a level of deeply embodied
knowledge on top of emergent reflexes
for motor control and then you're
learning to integrate them into an
interpersonal dance panccept showed this
is research you made reference to that
if you deprive male juvenile routes of
rough and tumble play which they do
spontaneously and they like to wrestle
then
they play hyper aggressively when you
allow them to like frenetically
desperately and uh you know which sort
of reminds me of what you were saying
about your expression of aggression and
their prefrontal cortexes don't mature
yeah and you can suppress their excess
play Behavior with amphetamines which is
Ritalin for example and so what really
seems to have happened and this is an
epidemic and it's an appalling epidemic
is that we have all these boys who are
likely high in extroversion and openness
so very exploratory boys some of them
more disagreeable Souls that would make
them also more you know less naturally
empathic who are absolutely deprived of
play and so they're desperately moving
because they need to and then that's
medicalized because the goal is to sit
down and shut the hell up even though
you're six years old and uh
you know than the medication the
amphetamines suppress the play Instinct
and this is really not a good solution
this is a terrible solution it's not a
good solution it's a terrible solution I
wrote a I wrote an essay on this for the
good men project back in I think 2016.
it was just literally titled
roughhousing not Ritalin and that was
that was exactly a thesis what you just
said is that we need to provide cultural
spaces for this Rough and Tumble play to
play out for young children I experience
it all the time I have uh I told you
before you we started recording that I
have a five-year-old daughter I also
have an eight-year-old boy and a
ten-year-old daughter and so I've been
doing this Rough and Tumble play with
them since they were little and they've
started training martial arts when they
were little four years old
um and so they have friends over and the
friends realize that they're an
affordance to wrestle which they don't
necessarily have anywhere else and so I
get to see how a lot of these kids who
are desperate for this opportunity
become very poorly regulated in
when they have an opportunity for it
right they yeah what happens well they
don't they don't they don't know how to
control their Force levels they don't
know that like it's appropriate to like
wrestle somebody and not to bite them or
to throw things right right or they
can't they can't control their emotions
so yeah you know like one thing I have
to work on with my kids is because
they've learned Jiu Jitsu since they
were little like they're used to doing
chokes and I have to like make sure they
remember because like if you put a
Chokehold on a kid who's never been
rough house with they will that will
just destroy their emotional regulation
completely and so my kids they don't
under you know for them all this stuff
is very natural
yeah yeah they don't they but they have
learned and they are learning and it's
amazing to watch how well they can
handle it and so my son who's uh eight
years old he's a little he's a little
bit smaller for his age or he's he's all
he's um
he's a third grader and he's just kind
of old enough to be a third grader so
he's on the bottom end of that class so
kids will kind of push on him because he
seems like he's small right
um and it's amazing to watch him just
not have an emotional reaction and be
physically strong enough and and
balanced enough that when a kid tries to
punch him he you know he he moves out of
the way and he grabs him and holds them
with his hand and just stops him
completely
um right so it's it's really an
extraordinary part of what you're part
of what you're pointing to there is that
emergent tolerance for provocation which
is also really important later in life
say if you're married because you need
to be able to regulate your emotional
response and of course the most direct
provocation is going to be the
provocation that you experience when
you're directly physically challenged
and to learn to
stay within the bounds of acceptable
play while you're being provoked which
is exactly what's happening when you're
wrestling does lay the groundwork for
civilized interaction you know a lot of
people
when they're married they can't really
have a serious conversation eh you can't
go down Into the Depths where the real
reparation work might need to be done
because they're afraid that
if they're provoked they don't know what
they'll do you know and what do people
do they break down in tears and have a
fit or they get aggressive or they
respond inappropriately in an aggressive
Manner and that can be physical very
quickly and then they don't know what
they're doing so they're very awkward in
their aggression they don't know how to
calibrate it and so because they don't
have that underlying yeah complex dance
of
you know provocation and response that's
all calibrated they can't ever risk
provoking each other plus the other
thing they don't learn which is really
important as well is that
you know if you're wrestling with
someone and playing around you kind of
encapsulate the conflict and you give it
a space to make itself manifest but the
rule is when you're done you're done
yeah and then you just return to normal
life and you know the other thing that
people don't have often is they don't
know how to bring a fight to an end
and so they won't start a fight because
they're afraid that it'll never end and
then they can't talk about anything
important like it's yeah it's amazing
how much of a catastrophe this really is
so Okay so we've got to the point in
your life where you were about 13 yeah
yeah starting to be hired out as a child
Whisperer in some sense yeah yeah two
yeah so that well you see that also
that's a good analogy because you also
see that with with dogs if you're
training a dog yeah a lot of what you do
with the dog is physical play and if the
dog starts to misbehave the easiest
thing to do with it is just flip it on
its back and hold it down it's like no
when I say no I mean stop doing that and
you know you don't have to do that with
a dog very often before the dog clues in
um
[Music]
inflation has consequences as the FED
raises interest rates to combat out of
control government spending long-term
bonds are diminishing in value which is
crippling the banks depositors are
holding their breath and investors are
bailing on Bank stocks diversification
has never been more important
the recent surge in gold prices is
directly tied to an extremely volatile
Market this is why gold has historically
been a great hedge against the stock
market and against inflation trust the
experts at Birch gold group to help you
diversify into gold text Jordan to
989898 to get a free info kit on gold
Birch gold will help you convert an
existing Ira or 401K into a tax
sheltered IRA and physical precious
metals with an A-Plus rating with the
Better Business Bureau thousands of
happy customers and countless five-star
reviews you can trust Birch gold to
protect your future text Jordan to
989898 to get your free info kit on gold
today then talk to one of their precious
metal Specialists that's Jordan to
989898 today
[Music]
the the parallels between like why play
research play is so important in humans
and dogs are the same like one of the
things that I found early on in my
research into what became evolved move
play was actually I was training a dog
and I and I read a book called the
Sirius uh puppy training book or
something like that and they talked
about bite inhibition in dogs I said
that you know puppies have to bite
because
um because that's how they manipulate
the world right like puppies or like
dogs their their hands are their jaws
and they want to use them and explore
what they're capable of so a puppy is
going to want to jaw spar with you it's
going to want to put its teeth on you
it's going to want to put its mouth on
you and if you tell that puppy no every
time that it tries to interact with you
like that it won't be able to map how
its mouth interacts with you so what he
advised is that what you need to do is
you you let the puppy start biting at
your hand and every time that it's the
force is too hard you pull away and you
deny the puppy what it's looking for
which is play
right and so now it's regulating its
aggression to okay I need to only bite
hard enough that this human being can
tolerate it and then he'll play with me
and yeah over time then the dog develops
bite inhibition so dogs that are not
allowed Rough and Tumble play it turns
out are much more dangerous as adults
because they can't
um regulate the impulse to bite when
they bite they bite fully but a dog
that's been played with extensively has
a very fine-tuned capacity to control
the level of force in its jaw so it has
a soft jaw yeah yeah well it's quite
miraculous you know with with dogs given
that they're essentially wolves you know
yeah if your dog is well trained you can
even play with them with one of his chew
toys or his bones which is really pretty
damn amazing and a well-trained dog is
unbelievably judicious with its bite
force and it will also play differently
with little kids than it will with
adults which shows a tremendous amount
of sophistication on the part of the dog
but that also assumes that you know
you've batted the dog around and
wrestled with it and harassed it and you
know and and pushed it so that it's not
easy to provoke and that's all also why
you know people wonder why people tease
and teasing is a form of more abstracted
Rough and Tumble plan it's it's the same
thing it's this it's this attempt to
push the the object of teasing sort of
to the level of their
tolerance for provocation to see what
the response is it's part of the way
that people
yeah assess each other profoundly like I
told this story in my book about this
guy lunch bucket that came to work on
the rail crew with us when I was working
on the rail crew in Saskatchewan and he
no one had ever played with lunch bucket
that's for sure and it was pretty
obvious to everybody that he was still
under the unfortunate Dominion of his
mother because she had packed him his
lunch bucket when the appropriate thing
to do socially was bring a brown paper
bag that wasn't you know too special
which was also interestingly true of our
high school you know and uh lunchbox it
didn't take kindly to being teased about
his lunch bucket and the level of
provocation that the other guys uh aimed
at him just increased and it got to the
point where people were throwing rocks
at him when he was on the crew but the
reason for that was because he he
couldn't he couldn't be trusted eh if
you provoked him he would respond with
too much aggression yeah and that was an
indication to everyone even though no
one really knew this that he wasn't
properly self socialized and then could
be a loose cannon if the you know in a
dicey situation yeah and the other thing
too I think that teasing it's also an
attempt to initiate play you know one of
the things you see with kids is that
when they meet each other on the
playground is they'll immediately
challenge each other you know they sort
of start out assuming the other kid is
like younger and less developmentally
able yeah but they ratchet that up
quickly to see if they're at a
peer-to-peer level and then they play on
the edge and that'll that'll make kids
friends if if kids can play as peers on
the edge then they become friends and
there's a lot of mutual provocation in
that and that's partly the extension of
that capacity for emotional regulation
as well as the extension capacity for
Creative interaction
yeah if we go back to that Rough and
Tumble theme
like I made a lot of my closest friends
after fist fights and I was in school it
was like we had to provoke each other to
that level before we could say drop into
a point of trust with each other in the
kind of redneck culture that I was
growing up in which maybe it wasn't so
similar to where you grew up I want to
go back to something you said earlier
because I want to reflect a couple of
things that I learned from your work in
specifically in this this idea of of how
the Rough and Tumble plays this this
game that that scales up
that
what I think is so profound about like
JJ Gibson's work and and some of these
people that we're referencing and is
you actually can't see the meaning in
the world if you can't act it out right
what we perceive is actually dependent
on how we can act and so when we engage
with something like rough and tumble
we're actually mapping in the different
potential meanings of touch and when we
don't get that opportunity to engage in
rough and tumble play what's actually
happening is that we're losing the map
of what a physical interaction can mean
and the other analogy of yours that I
really love is the analogy of resolution
so how many how many pixels are in the
res the picture that you have of
physical touch yeah and I think what's
happening in our culture is that we've
uh We've denied people so much basic
touch and so much basic Rough and Tumble
play that we've sort of collapsed the
picture of of of
um
of touch to sex and violence and so
you'll see kids engage in play and you
will see adults who are absolutely on
the edge of their seats because they
can't see the difference between healthy
productive play and violence because
they don't have right a refined map
yeah no that's an extremely useful
analogy and like everybody's map is
complete of everything but Maps differ
very much in resolution and that you
know the Biblical term for uh sexual
Congress is knowledge yeah and that's
partly because well sex is a form of
play it's a high form of physical play
and it's very properly practiced let's
say it's extraordinarily high resolution
and that's part of that
detailed exploration of the physical
landscape and the increase of the
resolution of the map and that's
definitely all part parcel of of
exploratory rough and humble play I mean
part of the reason that people are
loathe to allow their kids to engage in
boisterous play is because as you said
their maps are so low resolution that
they can't distinguish between
true aggression and and pretend
aggression and so there are often people
who are afraid for example of dogs
because they can't distinguish a dog
with its tail wagging its mouth hanging
open you know that wants to play and is
making Maneuvers in that direction they
can't distinguish that from an
aggressive Onslaught this is why you see
in schools this idiot insistence that
you know there should be no competitive
play because the the the teachers who
push that Doctrine have been played with
so little that they think all
play which is a form of competition it's
cooperation and competition
simultaneously they think all that's
just properly lumped into the category
of aggression and then they think all
aggression should be suppressed and it's
yeah it's it's absolutely what's
completely it's awful for young boys but
it's also for women too because the boys
end up awkward then end up awkward with
low resolution physical maps and you
know they can't dance and they can't
move and they're they they're emotional
regulate regulation is volatile and yeah
yeah I think uh to quote Jordan Peterson
it's a complete bloody disaster yeah
um yeah right when I first started
evolve move play
um Mercer Island which is one of the
school districts though or was near us
had banned tag like completely no
touch-based games and they had they had
shortened recesses to seven minutes and
their justification for this was because
they children couldn't play for longer
than 7 min without experiencing conflict
and this is Jesus
it's so absurd because it's like how are
they ever going to learn without these
things
oh yeah well the thing is people who do
take that attack assume that
enforced zero conflict equals peace you
know when you talked about this this uh
experience you had with your friends
that often you had a fight with what one
or more of them and you know that's
another thing that's quite different
about boys and girls because boys will
often even with their friends push
conflict to the point of an actual fight
and that generally does exactly what you
said it either if if two if two boys
face off each other and are willing to
fight generally they won't pick fights
with each other anymore that usually
brings it to an end and it's not that
rare for that to turn into a friendship
which is also very very interesting and
strange thing
during the season of Lent we are called
to abstain from luxuries and instead
more deeply embrace our faith co-workers
around the office have mentioned giving
up coffee alcohol and social media but
how about using this time to start
building a habit of prayer and
meditation
join me and thousands of others on
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the U.S hallow is helping me
maintain a daily prayer routine from now
until Easter and it can help you too
download the app for free at hallow.com
Jordan you can set prayer reminders and
track your progress along the way not
sure where to start check out father
Mike schmitz's Bible in a year available
on the Hallow app for brief daily Bible
readings and Reflections or pray
alongside Mark Wahlberg Jim Caviezel and
even some world-class athletes with Halo
you can customize a personal prayer plan
that works for you and listen anywhere
you are with downloadable offline
sessions get an exclusive three-month
free trial at hallow.com Jordan that's
hallow.com Jordan
[Music]
um I wanted to go back briefly to what
you're talking about with with sexuality
because uh and and I wanted to touch on
women in rough and tumble play because
so we we teach Rough and Tumble play we
we take the basic kind of architecture
of contact improvisation dance and mixed
martial arts and we build scalable games
that are vary from totally Cooperative
to hyper competitive and then we kind of
you can play a very competitive game
that's very safe
um by scaling the way that the players
can interact and we teach this to men
and women and now my general observation
is working with kids the boys always
want to roughhouse more right my son
roughhouse is more than his sisters for
sure but the girls love to roughhouse
with me and have always requested being
rough house with being wrestled with
being thrown around what I've noticed
with with working with adults is that
um
it's often the women actually who have
the most profound experience from the
roughhousing and I think that what it is
is that our culture in general is just
suppressing Rough and Tumble play
um but women are are more likely to to
have accepted the culture's story of you
can't engage in rough and tumble play
and they have fewer cultural spaces that
really give them the opportunity to do
that so they don't necessarily play like
football or get involved in a wrestling
team and so it's often women who come to
us who will say this was incredibly
healing for me and one of the things
that they say is it really changes the
way that they feel about men and like
helps the sort of gender conflict to be
able to experience
doing something very competitive and
physical that has no sexual element with
a man and that is really healing for
them and uh to to then bridge to the the
sexual aspect of it obviously men and
women have to figure that out but
there's also research that shows that If
you deny Rough and Tumble play to uh
juvenile Rats the male rats can't
successfully engage in courtship
behavior and mounting Behavior once they
become adults so if you look at the oh I
didn't know that oh oh that's very
interesting yeah and you look at what's
happening in our culture right now with
the you know just complete collapse and
the ability of people to form
Partnerships
this I think is is part of the story as
well we're denying them the basic sort
of sense of mapping and touch and
connection that is fundamental to
forming any sort of romantic
relationship
yeah yeah well this is also uh an
interesting point to insert some
observations about cell phones yeah you
know people are often extraordinarily
concerned with the content that's being
delivered to kids on the cell phones and
I think the content is relevant to some
degree I spend a lot of time for example
analyzing literature on violent video
games and aggression among boys and the
link between violent video games and
aggression is pretty damn
um
minimal what it appears to be the case
is that more aggressive boys like more
aggressive video games and there's not
much of a causal Loop there so and the
reason I'm bringing them that up is uh
to indicate that content of what's being
delivered on the cell phone might not be
the primary problem that might even be
true for pornography what is certainly a
problem is the fact of the substitution
of the screen for such things as direct
Rough and Tumble physical play or even
abstracted pretend play you know a lot
of this identity confusion that I see
among adolescents in let's say high
junior high high school and University
looks to me like late manifestation of
pretend play that should have occurred
at about the age of three you know
because at three kids will experiment
with well I can remember when my son was
a kid his sister he's a year and a half
younger than his sister and her friends
and they used to dress him up like a
princess or like with little fairy wings
and you know just as a form of
exploratory play and he got an
opportunity to inhabit that feminine
World while playing with these girls and
to figure out what it was like to be a
girl which is a necessary thing to do if
you're going to have some empathy for
girls let's yeah but then imagine if you
suppress that and that
play even cross-gender plays never
allowed to make itself manifest then why
wouldn't it re-emerge with the Vengeance
later when the when the stage is set to
make it socially acceptable anyways it
looks to me the furry phenomena oh that
looks to me like repressed pretend play
that might even be the case for late on
set autoginophilia among the the trans
guys you know God Only Knows Why that
cross-sex impulse makes itself manifest
but the probability it has something to
do with suppression of the Manifest of
the physical manifestation of the
feminine Spirit let's say that could
have been explored in pretend play that
seems to me to be highly probable what
the men are doing when they dress up in
women's clothing is pretending obviously
you know now there's a sexual element to
it but but uh that doesn't mean it isn't
pretend play
yeah I mean I think we can definitely
agree that that the suppression of play
is really a problem in that there's a
lot of cultural ground streamer facts
that are going to be very hard for us to
to map right and just just how much of
that is I'm I'm particularly concerned
like as you said about about video games
not so much because as you said of the
content but because of how they out
compete some of these other more
traditional nourishments it gives us uh
kind of one of the fundamental areas of
my thought is this idea that one of the
most effective ways that we can kind of
win in the in the capitalist system is
to deliver something that is hyper
stimulating that's very cheap right so
hyper stimulating products they a friend
of mine uh who's a neurobiologist who
studies obesity he
he said to me that what the food
industry has effectively done is they've
divorced flavor from nutrition
and right and when I thought about that
like I immediately had this chain of
thinking which was if if junk food is is
Flavor divorced from nutrition then uh
pornography is sexuality divorced from
the context of relationships yeah right
video games are thrilled divorced from
physicality
and so you take these boys who have this
inherent aggression and you let them
play fortnite and they can play all day
without any self-regulation from having
to you know the physical demands of
actual Rough and Tumble play they can
practice shooting and running and
jumping and all the things that you know
I did as a kid
um actually physically and that's
probably not bad necessarily it's not
that bad necessarily on its own the
problem is that it's so easily out
competes the actual the actual thing
that we need which is the real physical
play yeah well I saw that just recently
this week I was out with some young
people
um relatives of mine
and I had met them for years and we were
in a social situation for about 45
minutes sitting around a couch and some
some living room chairs around a
fireplace after dinner and one of them
was 13 and the other was 21 and they
just said they were just on their cell
phones the entire time the whole time
yeah and I thought well I felt I felt
very bad for the kids because I thought
well
first of all I thought I was like what
the hell are you doing there's five of
us around the fireplace and you're on
your phones completely engrossed in them
and I don't know what you're doing on
your phone but whatever you're doing
you're not being here now with actual
people and I think their whole lives are
like that and no one part of the reason
kids are so confused about their
identity is because
their identity is never played out in
the actual world they're in these
virtual delusions you know because what
you're describing is actually a kind of
delusion right it's an artificial world
that isn't properly mapped onto the real
world so delusional Landscapes of of
entertainment and that certainly is the
case for pornography yeah so
yeah so we so I mean this kind of gets
to the center of my message you know
like
I I think that in order to address the
meaning crisis we actually have to kind
of invite people back into their body
and that there are fundamental
reconnections that we have to make with
the world we have to renew that
relationship with the world so um we've
been talking a lot about the the the
Rough and Tumble play and I think of
that as one of like four fundamental or
let's say five fundamental connections
we have with the world
and those are kind of the internal
connections within the self the the body
uh to itself the body mind Spirit
emotional aspects so I think there's
like the somatic and structural layer
and then there's the body to the
environment how we move through the
world
that's parkour
um or gymnastics or track and field but
parkour I think is the most kind of
profound expression of it it's the
closest to the sort of exploratory
locomotor play that you find in every
culture and in
um
um and really in all other animals
almost
um and then you have the object
manipulation human beings of course are
tool using animals so right away kids
want to play with sticks and balls and
ropes and manipulate them and put them
in their mouths when they're little and
figure them out and then there's other
people which is the Rough and Tumble
aspect that we've talked about and then
the last is I think all of those things
put us in relationship to something
Transcendent when we go out and we do
Parkour in nature
and we work with people there's a
there's an emergent spirit that you can
experience there's a sense of the
broader things that you're embedded
within and that in order to cultivate
wisdom we actually have to
um get all the way down into the body
all the way into you know like our
friend John Burbank you would say that
those lower three p's of knowing the the
participatory perspectival and
procedural those have to be played out
through embodied practices
um and and so that's you know that's at
the center of it we we are we are
tempted all the time by these
hyper-stimulating products that are
designed to kind of grab onto those
areas of the brain stem that you know
that evolve to be rewarded
and and direct that behavior into
something that isn't what we evolved
with
and to recover the wisdom I think we
have to go back to those body practices
so so can let me ask you some practical
questions because a lot of people who
are listening
they might not even know how to initiate
play you know like people have asked me
to uh to write a book on parenting you
know one of the problems I have with
that is well I don't have little kids
anymore and so yeah I kind of forget
what I know you know it was never
exactly
explicit now I was very fortunate when I
was a kid because both my mother and my
father paid a lot of attention to me and
my dad in particular is markedly good
with little kids and I think that was
because he had a really really good
relationship with his grandfather and
had a lot of attention paid to him and
so that was just an embodied practice
let's say in our household and so I know
exactly what to do with little kids you
know I'm not the least bit afraid of
them I know exactly how to play with
them even if they're timid I know how to
poke them and you know Jolly them into a
bit of a reaction and to entice them out
of shyness but I don't exactly know how
to tell people how to do that so when
you're when you're working with kids who
are awkward and who have been deprived
of play and you're trying to entice them
into a game you obviously thought this
through structurally what do you
actually do to to get the kids to play
and how do you teach people to play with
their kids or with other people what are
aspects yeah absolutely so when we're
inviting people to kind of begin play
there's a couple things that we can do
one is we can think about how we can
strain the game right so all my teaching
is sort of deeply influenced by the
constraints-led approach and by the
ideas of ecological Dynamics so rather
than say trying to teach someone how to
punch before we let them Spar we develop
a game that doesn't require them to know
how to punch yet right so the first game
that we introduced to people uh a lot of
times in in the competitive aspect of
rough and tumble play is just like
standing on a narrow surface and
grabbing the other person's hand and
trying to pull them and off balance them
so this is a game that uh works really
well to introduce competition because
it's totally safe right I'm not I'm not
manipulating your body in any way that
could potentially hurt you
so when they say you say stand on a
narrow surface tell me exactly what you
have people do so like a common one this
game was originally taught to me by a
friend and we just did it on like curbs
in a parking lot but you know right a
lot a lot of times at my workshop you're
on the edge of something yeah so there's
a reason why that works it makes the win
condition a lot easier but also it
disadvantages larger athletes which is
important because the physical strength
is obviously going to to help the the
larger athletes succeed but because a
bigger athlete has a bigger moment of
sway their balance is actually a little
bit easier to compromise so you can take
a small woman and a large man and if
they're both inexperienced the Gap that
you would experience introducing them to
just wrestling is much lower in this
initial game and so people can get a lot
so they just grab it they grab one hand
yep each other off balance exactly oh
yeah that's cool because that's that the
the the conditions for victory are very
very clear doesn't require a lot of
aggression to move forward it shouldn't
be intimidating to people it the rules
are easy to learn oh yes that's a good
one that's something you could play I
often with little kids like two one of
the games I used to play with my kids
was just to step on their feet and then
try to step on my feet at the same time
you know obviously socks and you can
make quite a noise with your foot and
kids find out and they can back off when
they're you know they can back off real
easily be to get out of the game if
they're feeling a little bit you know
intimidated but oh yeah they'll laugh
and and cheer away at that and so that's
an analogy I would say an analog to this
off balance okay so that's a good that's
a good place to start so I was playing
with my four-month-old granddaughter she
could actually play this game yeah it
was amazing I did it's the it's the
earliest I'd seen someone engage in
truly reciprocal play which is really
four months old so I'd go one two three
holder of my so standing on my knee one
two three and then Bop her head on mine
yeah and then one two three Bop one two
three Bob and then I started
playing with the gap between the the uh
numbers one two
and man I'll tell you after 15
repetitions she got the game so that was
really cool because it was yeah well it
involved that immediate touch you know
but so there's this it's kind of like
peek-a-boo it's like there's a
predictability and then a surprise which
is part of a game but it was it was a
harmless initiatory game but it was
really something to see that she caught
on you know and it's theme plus
variation too which is exactly and you
see a musical play okay so you have
people trying to pull each other off
balance I imagine they're they're so how
do people react when you first introduce
them to that idea like our what's the
range of reactions well what's
interesting is we
in the past more so in the past when
people were less familiar with my work I
get a fair number of students almost all
of them women who would say I want to
participate in everything but I don't
want to do the Rough and Tumble play and
okay we'll get to it and you can choose
not to if you want to but you'll you
know if you see it and you want to do it
please step in and what we find is that
people will tell you you know I'm scared
of this I don't like I never liked
physical aggression anything like that
and you give them this opportunity to
play a game that's highly competitive
that that has a that they have a you
know like a Rel a sufficiently high
probability of winning right the 30 that
yak pinksup says right
and that it feels totally safe
everybody enjoys it without fail for 10
years of teaching this drill I've not
had one person who's come to a seminar
who have not who has not been lit up and
smiling and laughing by the end of
playing that game yeah I wonder what
that laughing signifies you know when
when I used to go work out with my
friends in Boston one of our games was
especially during a bench press was to
crack a joke and make the person laugh
because you lose all muscular control
when you laugh hey which is extremely
interesting you know because it's
laughter produces
physiological cessation of the ability
to be aggression aggressive you you just
have no muscular tension and so yeah
there's there's something about laughing
that's indicative of genuine safety and
peace right and it's indicative at a
very low level because it's it's
pre-conscious laughter no one if you
laugh consciously it's forced and fake
it has to be spontaneous and so you see
people doing this competitive
off balancing game let's say and you get
joy and laughter and that's I think
that's a deep physiological reflection
of the observation that there really is
safety and peace and and play happening
in this space right it's the celebration
of that
yeah if we go back to the idea we were
exploring earlier that that like these
things are actually fundamental to how
we attune and develop a real map with
somebody right what you could
you know the the what I speculate now
just off what you said is that the
laughter is occurring because it's a
signal of like really rapid Attunement
between two organisms where they're
actually learning each other on a much
deeper layer than even you know verbally
is going to offer but you'll find the
same thing if you're if you're meeting
someone you have a good dynamic in a
conversation they're gonna laughter is
gonna start to generate and I think it's
a signal yeah of that that sense of
safety and that joy that you're
experiencing obviously that's telling
you this is valuable this is worthwhile
this is something that you want to come
back to and repeat and so that sense
that there's a way to compete a way to
interact with somebody that's deeply
mutually affording of development yeah
right right yes exactly that's the
spirit of play that Mutual affordance of
I was remembering when my wife wasn't
played with a lot when she was a kid you
know a pretty good sense of sharp verbal
play and she was physically comfortable
in a lot of ways because she did a lot
of yoga but she hadn't been played with
a lot and you know I can remember a
couple of events so we were mock
fighting at one point she came at me
with her fists and I grabbed her hands
and I went like this and it actually
hurt her a little bit and I said well
you know when you go like this you open
your hands don't you know that yeah she
said no she'd never she'd never played
enough to know that you know someone
grabs your hands when you have fists and
brings them together you open your hands
well so I showed her how to do that and
then another time she was sitting on the
couch and I had a pillow and I went like
this
which means look out a pillow is coming
so I went like this and then I threw the
pillow and it got her and she you know
she was a little bit uh
what would you say it surprised yeah and
I said well
I showed you the pillow was coming why
didn't you catch it and she said well
she had no idea that you know one two
three meant look out a pillow is your
way now she her siblings were much older
than her eh and so and my siblings were
very close in aged to me and so
you know I had more of that intense play
than she did but a lot of these basic
rules of physical engagement she hadn't
learned and and so okay so so now you're
you're putting people on the edge you're
having them unbalance each other where
do you progress from there yeah so the
basic structure as we think about what
are the tools that we can manipulate
somebody's body with so the first tool
that we allow is just the the closed
hand right
um and then what's the targets what
parts of their body can manipulate so
now we're just manipulating hand versus
hand
so we have tools and targets and then we
have motion how do we limit the motion
so that that constraint of standing on
the the thing it it prevents them from
moving fast so we think about a game
like football where you can spear
someone with your head with a helmet on
it running as fast as you can there's a
very unconstrained game with a lot of
potential danger so we're trying to do
is just find ways to scale in from there
so the first thing that we're going to
do is just go from you can only
manipulate their hand with your hand so
now you have both your hands and you can
manipulate any part of their body below
their neck excluding their genitals
right so all the safe parts of the body
manipulate and now you're still trying
to off balance them and because you you
don't have to pick them up and throw
them or anything you just have to get
them to step off you still have a really
safe game right and then as we progress
up we might play a game like the game
that you mentioned trying to step on
somebody's foot right this is a basic
tag game it's a tag game of tagging
somebody's foot so you can play games
like that where the target is something
like just their foot rather than trying
to kick someone in the head as we would
in Muay Thai but we're starting to learn
how to interpret somebody entering our
space somebody you know that that Gap
closing the sense of Rhythm the sense of
timing that somebody has and all that's
going to donate to these games as we
move down the kind of the progression
and then we think about the progression
as working towards the highly
competitive highly free unconstrained
games like mixed martial arts but also
moving towards the highly attuned
acrobatic games like dance because we
want people to be able to to have that
sense
um you uh
your next book I believe is called we
who wrestle with God
yeah yeah and so I was listening to you
talk with John in one of your your first
interview with John and you're talking
about that idea of like maybe the right
relationship to God is to wrestle with
him it's something that you have to to
struggle with and I never thought about
that precisely that embodied sense you
know although obviously when Jacob
wrestles with the angel It's physical
combat right but I hadn't I hadn't put
that extra piece in there so that's very
interesting and useful I'll file that
away
yeah so the question that I had when
listening to that is how can we become
the type of people who can wrestle with
God
if we've never wrestled
right you have to build that so I said
this to one of my groups of students and
and it was interesting it was the women
in the group who said what if the right
relationship to God Is Dance
and I said
it's it's both right it has to it's got
to be both
um
so so in the way that we educate people
physically we want to be exploring these
two parameters of how can we can go
deeper and deeper into Attunement and
the the affordances that come with
Attunement and how can we compete and
press each other right to our Edge as
much as possible what's interesting that
you've got two polls there eh there's
there's sophisticated dance as an
extension of embodied play and then
there's sophisticated
combat as an extension of play and I
wonder if if is the do you suppose
the dance element obviously Maps more
self-evidently onto male female
relationships and sex yeah and the and
the wrestling per se has more to do some
with I suppose something like the
hierarchical organization of the social
structure there'd be more because
there'd be some dominance and submission
associated with that and the attempt to
build something like a hierarchy of
competence but it's interesting that you
have those two
and extensions for that that play makes
itself manifest in relationship to and
yeah I don't I don't know exactly how to
conceptualize that well let me tell you
something this reminds me something of
another way that I've kind of like taken
some some ideas that I got from you and
extended them in my work but you've
talked about the idea that you know
dominance hierarchies are older than
trees right you can you can look across
the animal kingdom and find that there's
forms of non-lethal agonistic combat by
which we determine the dominance
hierarchy so yeah what's what's
fascinating about like yuck Peng sets
rats you should call it the competence
hierarchy yes I agree I I agree
absolutely so the competence hierarchy
so rats how when they wrestle they pin
each other on their shoulders this is
fascinating because it's almost a
cultural Universal that there's some
form of wrestling that involves pinning
the other guy on his back and we see
this across the animal kingdom if uh
guanas right like big lizards in in um
in in Australia they wrestle and knock
each other over and get on top of you
know one's pushing the other one down on
the belly even venomous snakes will wrap
each other around the head and try to
press the other one's head to the ground
so I think that this that there's this
Central problem that animals had which
was there are better places to be in
worse places to be and we want to
determine who gets to be in the better
places and who has to be in the worst
places and we want to do that in a way
that's going to be minimally damaging to
everybody so we're going to develop
right so best way of making it's the
best way of uh coping with those
occasions when the competition does have
a zero-sum element to it yep yeah
exactly so but here's the interesting
thing is how the the non-zero sum
evolves out of the Zero Sum so first we
have this we're we're going to kill each
other first and then that's really
expensive let's not do that is there a
way that we can play where we're not
going to kill each other so a venomous
snake doesn't bite with its venom it
doesn't waste that it wrestles in order
to determine the hierarchy so now when
we wrestle once we have that we have
this capacity to exact that basic
structure to say Hey you and I we can
play this game when it's not about
actually determining the competence
hierarchy it's just about building our
confidence for when the real problem
happens
so that yeah so now now all these
animals have this basic drive to engage
in some kind of
competitive wrestling because it helps
them develop social competence
but now all these other things can get
mapped into it it can get exacted to to
be something that's building empathy so
as we become social animals now we are
actually going to this as a place by
which we begin to map in a sense of what
the other is we develop a theory of mind
that that stuff about Yak pancreps rats
and the fact that the the bigger rat has
to be able to know that if it wins too
often the small rat won't play with him
that's the that's the beginning of
theory of mind yeah well I think the
rats must be evaluating you know because
imagine that in each game
there's a series of micro victories and
micro defeats and if you keep the ratio
of Victory high enough for your opponent
ratio of Victory to defeat they're going
to be enthusiastic play partners and
you're constantly available like when I
was teaching my kids to play ping pong
you know they weren't going to win but
they weren't going to lose 21 nothing
yeah you know I would just ratchet up my
skill level so that I kept them on the
edge of their performance and that meant
that well they'd gain as many points as
I could allow them to gain I still see
that with my son you know because I
taught him to play ping pong and then he
got better than me because he learned
all my tricks and his new tricks and you
know
oh it'll be frequently the case that I'm
ahead of him say 1713 near the end of a
game and then he'll really kick into
high gear yeah you know and it's very
annoying because I've been working
pretty hard on my edge trying to give
him a good stomping but he has some left
in reserve you know but he's calibrating
we automatically calibrate if we're
sophisticated players to keep our
partner on that Dynamic edge of
development this is also why it's so
wrong to think about competition as a
zero-sum process because if you're
competing optimally first of all you
want a well-matched partner because
otherwise it's not a fair game and it's
no fun but if you're competing optimally
the your opponent has micro victories
the whole way along and the Rats must
pick that up you know the big rat yeah
must understand that if he's dominating
too heavily the game starts to become no
fun because the little rat gets
demoralized and then won't put up a good
scrap you've got to and you do the same
thing with puppies you know as you
mm-hmm you let them win as much as is
appropriate and it's the same with your
kids you let them win as much as is
appropriate but no more than that and
you do that well simultaneously
scaffolding their Mastery yeah you're
you're working to put them on that zone
of proximal development yeah right yeah
yeah and so that's the that's the key to
good play and that's what you know we
think is so important about like a
actual Rough and Tumble curriculum is
that it's about educating people about
how to in the deepest embodied sense
find that edge in mixed Partnerships
right where there is a massive skill Gap
how could I play as someone who's you
know six foot one 220 pounds has been
training martial arts my whole life with
a small woman and make the game such
that she gets something out of it and I
even get something out of it
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
documentary logos and literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
scripts memorization today exists only
because of what is sung
amazing here we have a Gutenberg Bible
printed on the Press of Johann gooper
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
so you have this large set of embodied
skills and now you're playing with an
opponent that is uh not matched at the
the like the the edge of your skill set
part of the way you do that for example
is by
imposing arbitrary limitations on the
players so they have to stand on the
edge of a curb what else do you do to
limit yourself when you're dealing with
a less able partner so that the game is
still fun for you yeah so um in the in
the play research they talk about
self-handicapping you know a classic
example maybe anybody's seen is a very
large dog playing with a very small dog
so if you see a Great Dane playing with
Chihuahua the Great Dane will flop on
its back so that the Chihuahua can jaw
spar with it right so it's given up all
its capacity to move just so that the
game can play out in a way that works
for both so we're trying to educate
people as well as we move them through
these stages to learn how to
self-handicap in ways that are
appropriate for them so I work on this
with my kids right so my my if my son is
wrestling my eight-year-old son is
wrestling with my five-year-old
um it's like how can you limit yourself
in the game such that it's actually now
a fair fight and it's useful for both of
you so for myself if I was sparring with
somebody right I could switch to my
offside I'm a dominant you know yeah
left hand forward so now I have to fight
with the other side I can remove a hand
I can't I can't use both my hands I can
create a set of techniques that I have
to use
um so I can only use like I only get a
you know I only give myself a point if I
do this thing not not some set of other
things that I might be really good at
right
um I can limit my motion so you adopt a
set of limitations until exactly evenly
matched essentially yeah that's the goal
is how do I find that level of
limitation so for my my my son and my
daughter they might have a race and I
might say okay you guys want to race
um we can put her ahead or we can maybe
have you run on all fours and she gets
to run on her feet and then they get
something that's mutually rewarding
right right right so so let's talk a
little bit too about um okay so we
talked about the curriculum of
development and you use basically the
equivalent of uh incremental behavioral
exposure is that exactly you're setting
people in in a uh in a non-threatening
initial highly structured situation and
then you
remove a constraint at a time
essentially as people scaffold up their
ability to play how does the parkour we
should Define parkour for everybody
because not everybody listening will
know and and why don't you introduce
that into it because that's also the
person against the world instead of the
person competing against another person
yeah this is the perfect Bridge so I I
found parkour when I was
um 23 years old and I've been doing
gymnastics for some period of time
before that
um and it's very interesting because I
remember really clearly
um I was very influenced by the Lord of
the Rings and I remember really clearly
as a young and like 12 years old
realizing that like there were no
dragons to go out and slay physically
and so when I saw David Bell the founder
of Parkour jumping between buildings I
had this really deep sense that like you
can do something heroic in life but the
challenge isn't necessarily
a dragon out there it's the fears that
are inside you that would prevent you
from being able to do what you're you're
going to do and so I started practicing
parkour and it completely I fell in love
with it and it had this transformative
effect on me and so over the years I've
been like what is happening with parkour
what is going on sorry just to Define
parkour for a moment parkour is a
discipline of learning to overcome
obstacles that came out of France in the
early or the late 90s
and so it's associated with jumping
between buildings but it doesn't have to
be buildings right it's just finding
obstacles in the environment running
jumping climbing moving on the forest to
try to surpass and overcome that
obstacle I could think of it as just
playing with obstacles and I think
fundamentally what it is is actually
just exploratory locomotor play you've
talked about um the example of again the
rap model right if you drop a rat into a
new environment
it'll first freeze and then it will
explore the environment but then we'll
actually play with the way in which it
moves to its environment it will add you
know variation to how it moves and by
doing so it's actually mapping all the
potential Pathways in that environment
and increasing its behavioral activities
the affordances and the obstacles you
bet yeah exactly so that's precisely
what we're doing with parkour and I
think it's so interesting because we're
literally mapping meaning into the world
where you develop when you start doing
parkour is something called parkour
Vision so you've been walking through
the world for years and you see a wall
and a wall just means a place you can't
go in right but now all of a sudden a
wall means a place that you can run up
or a wall means a thing that you can
flip off of or do any number of
different techniques so that wall is now
much richer for you it literally is a
source of reward to see a wall because
the relationship between the walls
actually code movement that you can use
and right right and so that that's how
it Maps meaning into the world and then
there's this sense that
you're acting out the heroic archetype
every time that you go out to do parkour
right it's it is embodying that meta
myth because you you'll be walking and
you'll see a jump that calls to you
and that jump is some it's it's
undifferentiated you don't yet know what
you can do and it has promise right like
if you do it it's really cool it's
exciting but if you fail you might get
hurt
right and especially as you scale up
your abilities like the potential
dangers can become very very high
and so you get to play with and
recognize what it's like to experience
fear at a really deep level and then you
get to go through the physical process
of
how does my body handle this fear what
do I need to to prepare myself and then
how do I make the commitment and make
the jump to the other side right right
well it's a great form of play
symbolically because you know it's
you're gonna the landscape is one of
Pathways affordances and obstacles
that's basically how the world lays it
out itself out for us and you know you
can avoid an obstacle
yep but the the highest art is to
transform an obstacle into an affordance
right this is no longer an obstacle it's
something that I can use in my to
facilitate my pathway forward no and
that that's the highest form of play I
mean one of the things I've learned
quite
with some difficulty let's say over the
last five years is that the most
adversarial
obstacles in the form of
let's call them pathologically
narcissistic and destructive journalists
are actually afford the most serious
play because the the more intense the
attack the more potential there is in
making your ability to contend with it
manifest yeah and that's a very strange
thing to learn but it's you know and
it's it's not a game without high stakes
but
man it's something to think about is
that the highest art of Mastery the
highest form of Mastery is to turn the
worst obstacle into the most remarkable
affordance absolutely there's something
there's something deep about that you
know that
you may know this you probably do that
oh we calibrate a lot of fine actions
with opponent processing and almost all
of our fine actions are the consequence
of two systems in our position
modulating each other so if you want to
move your hand really smoothly you can
do it like this but it's still kind of
jerky if you analyze it at the micro
level but if you do this you can move
your hand with Incredible precision and
that's an opponent process and a
tremendous number of the physiological
processes that we undertake our opponent
processes and yeah you know you have
that important process Dynamic within a
marriage and you have it within a debate
you have it within Play It's it seems to
be a universal principle the principle
of properly balanced opponent processing
and you could think about that at the
highest level is the most the most
fundamental obstacle might be the
adversary that affords the most serious
play naxa well that's a that's a
revolutionary way to conceptualize the
world yeah that's uh I love that that
one that the mo
the the most challenging adversary that
you can handle that affords you the
capacity to play that I think is really
at the center of what provides that you
know um I love the term allostasis right
so we we think that we're in yeah we're
homeostasis but we're actually in a
continual process development and a
continual process of development is
always
um between these paired reciprocal uh
opponent processing systems right so the
parasympathetic nervous and the
sympathetic nervous system so as I Was
preparing for this discussion I was
listening to your last discussion with
John burbanki and uh talking to him a
little bit and I and I I was thinking
about how those
those those connections that I talked
about the fundamental connections that a
practice has to offer it has to
integrate the self better right it has
to integrate the self with the physical
world better it has to integrate the
self with the things we can manipulate
better and with other social beings
better and then with this concept of the
Transcendent all of those are also all
goes integration okay yes why are they
all opponent processing because you can
you can you can split the self right
you're you're a Unity but you're also a
multiplicity and when you can look at
yourself and you've talked about this if
you want to think deeply about something
you have to argue with yourself you have
to create two different dialogues in
your head so there's this fundamentally
dialogical process and you can you can
embody that by just creating tension in
your body between different systems and
feeling how you know
these two things now now I'm playing
that and how I can grow with it and then
you can think about can my mind control
my body better or can my body support my
mind better right and all those things
can be in in Dynamic composition and
obviously once we get to parkour right
that that body environment practice the
the environment is the opponent right
and I'm learning to have greater and
greater Mastery greater and greater
affordances available to me through that
relationship and then the same thing
when I learned to throw and catch and
swing objects and then obviously do fine
crafting things which are kind of the
the developmental derivative of those
basic play instincts to play with
objects
and then obviously when I'm engaged in
rough and tumble Play It's opponent
processing and so yeah I think
fundamentally we need an embodied set of
physical practices that allow us to a
tune our relevance realization across
these fundamental relationships in order
to act out the meta myth that you
described in maps and meaning
yeah yeah well that that seems that
seems right how do you scaffold parkour
for people we talked a little bit about
how you introduce new kids or adults for
that matter who haven't played I really
like the curb game I think that's I'm
going to play that with my grandkids
that's a good idea that's really good
you could do that by having people stand
on their tiptoes too yep absolutely so
then the defeat would be that you put
your feet on the ground yeah and that
would be a good way of putting a larger
person off balance as well as you you
can fight with me but you have to stay
on your tiptoes yeah yeah so that's
really good so but how do you it I
because I I have done anything like
parkour you know and so I'm kind of
wondering how would you how would you
introduce someone or how would someone
introduce themselves to that rail yeah
well if you think about his exploratory
locomotor play everyone's done parkour
right you've you've gone to an
environment and been like how do I get
from here to there that's that's the
fundamental thing right is just go out
and do it so you can just you could
um there was a group in the UK the
parkour dance company that did some
really beautiful things on training
parkour for adults in their 70s and 80s
right and they had them like walking
through a park sitting down on a bench
spinning around and standing up on the
other side of the bench and then they
could lay down on their stomach and spin
around to the other side then they could
vary maybe they feel comfortable
spinning to the right and less
comfortable spinning to the left and
then they can just get competent at both
right just getting up and down off of a
chair you could have thousands of
variations that you can explore getting
up and down off of the ground all of
those things we can expand our
affordances and and and children will
inherently do this I saw a documentary
with Jack White when he was traveling
through Canada and Jack uh he sets up
his stage in a very interesting way so
first of all he plays this really old
beat up guitar yeah and it's just he's
had it forever and it's just done you
know and it never stays in tune so while
he's playing on stage he has to tune his
guitar Non-Stop and then he plays a
bunch of different instruments you know
laid out on the stage but he puts them
in places that are awkward to get to so
that he has to stay on the edge to play
the damn instruments and you know partly
what he's doing in his live performances
he's he's
um uh what would you call it modeling
that ability to stay on the playful Edge
and the way he does that is by setting
up artificial obstacles in his
environment and then having to
creatively transform them into
affordances on the Fly and so that's
that's really well he's very wise and
and Jack White's a particularly
interesting musician because you know
he's got got real heavy metal Edge kind
of LED zeppeliness heaviness to him yeah
but what Jack is an extremely his lyrics
are extremely optimistic and positive
and he's extremely playful and so he's a
master of that transformation of the
obstacle into the affordance it's uh
it's he's basically doing parkour he's
creating a locomotive challenge yeah
yeah to be able to access his instrument
so that he can get a deeper experience
of play and share that with his audience
that's uh right right so one of the
things you recommend is like even if I
wanted to get up out of my chair I could
use my left foot yeah my right foot
right just vary that so that yeah I see
that's very interesting you could spin
on your way up
yeah right what are the relationships so
you know just like contralateral versus
ipsilateral so I'm gonna put my my left
foot on the ground on my right hand and
then I can switch to the other side then
I can lean everything on one side right
I can do a spin as I stand up
there's so many little fine-tuned
variations that we can find once we take
on this exploratory ethic in
relationship to our movement and as we
do that we're going to be refining and
making more sophisticated the body and I
believe when we put that in
um in Dynamic relationship to these
other sets of practices we get to
extract those insights out and create a
more coherent complete approach to
character development
right right well we and we could think
about that two ways you know one way is
that you're mapping a broader set of
possibilities onto any given object
exactly the objects aren't objects their
affordances and obstacles they're not
objects and so you're expanding your map
of the possibility of the world in your
relationship to it and so that is an
expansion of the meanings of the world
but the other thing you're doing too you
know we can imagine if I if I
concentrated for a month on doing things
left-sided instead of right-sided I'm
gonna
instantiate a series of
neurophysiological changes right so I'm
going to start building new motor maps
and that'll be a form of neural growth
and neural regeneration I'm going to
redress the imbalance between the two
sides of my body but it's also the case
that
you know those physiological
Transformations Cascade all the way down
to the cellular level and if you if you
put new stresses on yourself especially
voluntarily you turn new genes on to
code for new proteins and so yeah not
only do you remap the meanings of the
external world but you also literally
open up new physiological possibilities
from the cellular level Upward at all
the levels of your organization you know
your internal physiological organization
and release new elements of your
character so it's partly an expansion of
the map but it's also an expansion of of
psychophysiological capability all the
way down to the cell yeah yeah yeah yeah
absolutely so you
so we map the meaning into the world and
the meaning that's available to us in
the world is always contingent on the
action capabilities within the self but
it was so beautiful about the way that
you just said that it made me think so
much of like the jungian concept of the
self which again you introduced me to
but right the self is that the highest
potential that that second self that's
laid out over time and so what you're
pointing out is that when we engage with
these physical practices we are actually
in some sense being able to bring into
the body a more complete representation
of that self
yeah you bet well you can think about
imagine that coded into the DNA
the DNA is a repository of potential but
the potential won't make itself manifest
without the requisite Demand right it
has to be the stress has to call the
potential into being and so that that
play you know maybe it's left-sided play
it's going to produce a new form of
stress that's a new kind of demand and
that's going to unlock new potential and
part of that self you know Jung likened
that self to the oak tree that's
implicit in the acorn yes and so it's a
potential that could expand itself out
into space in a variety of different
ways but that that that there are many
potential trees inside a particular
Acorn you could think about it that way
the oak is going to develop differently
depending on the soil that it's placed
in but that's the case for all of us at
any moment is there are still many
potential selves that are locked into
the
into the potential of the DNA coding and
that can be enticed outward with the
appropriate voluntary stress the other
the other thing that's interesting about
that too is imagine that not only are
you calling on as of yet unrevealed
physiological potential right down to
the cellular level but you're also
practicing the physiological
instantiation of a particular Spirit and
the spirit would be that of voluntary
challenge right so all the practices
you're described of you're describing
are undertaken in the spirit of
voluntary challenge yes and so while
you're becoming better at each skill
you're also becoming better at
manifesting the Spirit of voluntary
Challenge and that's that's like a meta
Spirit right and there's no reason to
assume that that isn't encoded
in genetic potential as well and so that
idea of communing with the heroic
ancestor you know if that's part and
parcel of the process of ancestral
communication ancestor worship let's say
that expands out to something like
oh well it expands out in the in the
Jewish writings into like apprehension
of God himself it's the it's the
realization of that implicit potential
it's the practice of the realization of
that implicit potential that actually
constitutes the union with that spirit
yeah that's beautiful I was literally
just reading I was I read through all
the the beginnings of the chapters of
maps of meaning yesterday
um and uh the chapter on
um on the Hostile Brothers right not the
middle section you talk about the idea
that there's there's two sort of
um transpersonal archetypes that we can
play out right at the individual level
there's the one there's this the the
spirit that takes on the idea that the
world is inherently good and that I can
reveal that good through interacting
with it and then there's the spirit that
sees the insufficiency of the world and
falls in love with its own rationality
and that that gives rise to Assa a kind
of tyranny and I was and I was thinking
about you know
I I feel like the
the digital world view that we're the
mechanistic digital Cartesian world view
that is is sort of predominant right now
it is much more that that second spirit
and that in order to to to step outside
of it in order to re-ground ourselves we
actually have to physically embody what
that is and that's exactly what these
practices do they take you into acting
out that heroic archetype that
exploratory heroic archetype and as I've
built my ideas over the years what I've
seen is that like parkour can be
transformative but it can also fail to
transform because it's only one way of
in which we relate to the fundamental
aspects of reality but when we put it in
dialogue with these other aspects of
practice all of a sudden that
transformational capacity is is
increased so why why does it why does it
fail and why is it so necessary to put
it in context with the other practices
yeah so can it fail yeah the
um
I I when I started parkour I felt like
had dramatically transformed me and
everyone around me who's starting
parkour at the same time we all had this
you know Messianic I mean part of this
is just developmental right we're all
late adolescents in some sense early 20s
and there's you know you're going to be
Messianic about whatever Collective
identity that you take on but
nonetheless we did have this feeling and
then uh over time what I noticed was
that people would talk about the changes
but I wouldn't necessarily see the
change or then other people came into
discipline who were hobbyists and they
didn't really see the transform of power
so I started asking how do we get that
transformative power
and like the big the bigger one that I
see all the time is like parkour is
predominantly a young male sport it's
like 90 young men who do it and a lot of
times they are kind of nerdy kids they
didn't have a strong sport background
they're small and you know not
physically strong when they start and
they come into the sport and they
develop these beautiful incredibly
strong physical bodies they get
healthier they change their diets their
skin clears up and all of a sudden
they're literally physically beautiful
young men and they're hyper courageous
right they can jump between buildings
and do multiple flips but they still
can't talk to a girl
right right right and it's like you talk
so much about how this has made you
courageous but in this very fundamental
thing you are not expressing that
courage
so if we're if we're practicing
generalization exactly so we
in any practice I believe
um we we need to recognize that the
local game is always
um kind of a distraction from what
actually we're trying to accomplish
which is that General Adaptation to the
metagame so if we take on parkour as a
practice and we think about it as a
practice that that builds us towards the
metagame then then that's automatically
going to start I think potentiating the
transfer but then we can ask
is there just a better way for me to
cultivate courage right now maybe I need
to go do Toastmasters maybe I need to go
to a contact improv class and when you
start to kind of schematize that that
you need connection and Attunement
across these fundamental connections oh
these fundamental uh axes then you you
can you can start to piece together the
areas of your character that are right
so how do you how do you lay out the
axis again you you talked about internal
integration yes you're talking about
integration between people you talked
about integration between the Sexes
let's say and you talked about
integration in relationship to uh the
natural world so those are all those are
all different domains of games yeah and
you could think of the metagame as
emerging out of all those domains right
you have to snap to yourself you have to
be mapped to other people you have to be
mapped to the other sex you have to be
mapped to the world yeah and you can't
concentrate on any one of those at the
expense of the other without becoming
yeah
so the five of the five that that I that
I've been using are the the
relationships internal to the self right
and those are structural and
psychological
um the relationship between the self and
the physical environment as a set of
obstacles and affordances we move
through and then you could Nest this
within that but I think it's useful to
separate out as human beings the objects
that we can manipulate right and you see
this in in uh in play research as well
play research talks about exploratory
locomotor play object oriented play and
Rough and Tumble play
so if we if we take those those
fundamentals so you're you're you have
the first intrinsic and if you look at
like a little baby how do they start
playing they're like where's my toe
right where are my fingers how do I move
this body what's rolling that's like the
somatic instructional layer and then
then they're able to crawl and cruise
and climb and that's that parkour layer
and then they're they're able to pick
things up and manipulate them that
happens at the same time but those are
kind of two separate aspects of
development and then they're always
interacting with their their mother
first and their father and their their
siblings in the rough and double play is
scaling up and then all that in some
sense is nested in in these higher
spiritual aspects which I think are also
you know you've talked about the
development from exploration Behavior to
play to Ritual
so you can see that development there so
those are the five axes and then within
obviously the interactive element we
have you know uh sort of like uh inter
intersexual like how men learn to deal
with men how women learn to deal with
women and then you have the intrasexual
and then there's obviously the romantic
and sexual aspect of that which can
which obviously dance is an
extraordinarily important aspect of that
is you know you've explored does that
all makes sense the way I've laid that
out yeah yeah yeah yeah well I like the
it's nice to lay out the different
the diff Escape so that people have some
sense of the different domains in which
Mastery could be pursued and
accomplished and it's also useful to
point out that
you don't want to allow the practice to
become an end in itself exactly I mean
the purpose of becoming great at
basketball isn't to become great at
basketball it's to become great at being
a human being and that's going to
involve a lot of teamwork and a lot of
coaching and a lot of mentoring and a
lot of fair play and and you know maybe
attention to the to the structure of the
sport itself all of that but exactly you
don't want to make your discipline a
dead ant
and precise that it should be
generalized is extremely important yeah
and so
because that otherwise you could get
locked within your subculture and that's
when things get kind of cult-like yes
and and I've seen this repeatedly every
every practice that I've seen someone
say is transformative I've seen that
there's a dark side to it so in parkour
you can say I'm gonna go do this jump
and that's going to make me more
courageous because I'm facing down my
fear and it can absolutely do that but
there's also this weird way in which you
can become a place in which you can
reinforce the image of yourself as
courageous as you're failing to act it
out everywhere else in your life it's
like no I'm too afraid well that's a
video game problem too yeah exactly same
thing same thing yeah so then take
something like meditation vipassana
right you're learning to calm yourself
down to be focused
but then I've seen people who get
trapped inside that that state and they
can't they can't access it outside of it
they can become even more fragile their
Equanimity can become more fragile
through the practice
so but if you take parkour and you take
a focus practice the focus practice
helps you actually attune to and get
into flow state within the parkour and
the parkour actually creates a arena in
which you can test whether your
meditative practice is actually having
the effect that you're looking for so by
having these opponent processing
relationships between all these
different practices that's why I believe
that is fundamental too a real
cultivation of wisdom
right right so so tell me about uh tell
me about your Enterprise per se like if
people go onto your website for example
what do they find what do you offer and
and how can people
engage in this and duplicate it you know
in for themselves in their own lives
yeah so we have a website of
allmouthplay.com on there you can find
online courses that get you started they
start with parkour and then add in
elements of other things
um so we have our online courses people
can check those out and then we teach
Retreats that's really the center of
what we do so uh we're in the middle of
kind of selling this year's Retreats uh
we have some soft spots left so if
people see this and want to join us
um they probably want to to get on that
first in the Retreats that's where we're
able to go deepest into this full
experience because we talk about those
five fundamental practices that I that I
mentioned it's four fundamental
practices that afford five connections
but then we we also go into the
mindfulness practices which are kind of
a derivative of the somatic and
structural layer and then into the
nature connection practices learning
about the world that we experience and
being able to craft and use it which
comes out of the second two and then
into the dialogical right so is
something that John burbanki again our
mutual friend has really helped us with
is like adding in some of these deep
dialogical practices so that we are
we're getting people in conversation
um and then doing circles and then in
storytelling and even in Theatrical
elements to get all of these things sort
of
um coming together and there's a ritual
aspect to it as well uh so we have two
why would people experience oh yeah
sorry go ahead obviously you can lay
that out tell me exactly what happens
when someone comes to a retreat
absolutely so we have two five-day
Retreats and one a day retreat in the
summer
um and when you come essentially we'll
we'll pick everyone up and then as they
arrive we will take them through a set
of practices that involve both physical
aspects and they're very gentle sort of
rough and tumble aspects and dialogical
aspects so that they can get as much of
a sense of Attunement to everyone else
in the group as possible right away then
we'll have dinner and we you know kind
of make as much you know local fresh
food as we can to support people because
the food element is a huge part actually
of how people Bond as well and doing
that right is really important
um and then we'll have an opening
ceremony and that opening ceremony is a
way of creating commitment and and bond
in the group
and of sort of exiting the world that we
were in before we entered this
um so actually like use a piece of this
so I had a bunch of really intense uh
stuff going on with business and some
political stuff in my community that was
taking my attention when I got the news
that you and I were gonna have a
conversation today and so I was like I
need to let go of all of that so that I
can be show up best for this
conversation with Jordan so I went down
to
um the there's a there's a cliff with a
beautiful pool of water underneath it's
about 15 uh uh 15 minutes from my house
walk so I walked down there and I did a
little Mantra saying I'm going to let
all that go when I hit the water I'm
washing all that away and I'm going to
be focused on this one thing that's
Central for me right now and then so I
did a mantra for like five minutes and I
did some some like Qigong practice
standing on the top of this cliff and
then I jumped into the water and I came
out and sure enough like I was so much
more ready to be focused once I exited
the water so we'll do a similar type of
process with someone when they arrive
for this retreat 3 and then over the
course of the retreat will take them to
a bunch of beautiful spaces so there are
spaces where we as I mentioned jump into
water from Cliffs there's actually a
tunnel through a waterfall that we have
access to and can take people through
and that's a really intense rebirth
experience to actually climb up through
this tunnel where water is pouring down
in your head is extraordinary and then
there's like Driftwood on the beach that
we teach Parkour in and there's uh Sandy
Beach that we wrestle and do all the
rough housing practices and we even play
some like team sport type games going up
this hill of sand and it's very nice
because it's safe because of the sand
and then we have these beautiful trees
that we move through you know human
beings
are are the sense of 60 million years of
arboreal Evolution so we take people
back into moving in the trees
um
and we take people up to Alpine lakes
and swim in the Alpine Lakes we take
people to natural water slides and every
day we're sort of weaving together the
basic fundamental structural practices
with learning how to move effectively
through the environment
with other people and with playing games
with balls and sticks and ropes and then
we also take them into those mindfulness
practices the dialogical practices and
um learning like the language of the
birds that we experience around us
learning tracking learning wild edibles
so they're more deeply connecting and
mapping out the connection between the
human being and the natural world so I
could go on and on how long have you
been doing that uh this is the 11th year
that we've been offering these Retreats
oh yeah and so how many people have you
have you offered the retreats to about
now I'm not sure uh so the first few
years we just did one Retreat a year and
we take approximately 20 students per
Retreat and then the last few years
we've been offering three Retreats a
year so maybe 300 people something like
that and so what what what do people
report what's their experience and and
yeah do you have any sense of what the
longer term impact is in in their life
yeah I mean so uh John said it was the
most I think he said it was the most
transformative experience of his life
which is uh extraordinary oh yeah yeah
that's an extraordinary feather in my
cap right to to hear that that's for
sure yeah yeah yeah definitely
definitely and so why did he feel that
so if I can remember correctly John and
I had a whole conversation about this on
his channel but it was
the sense of of taking on those intense
physical practices and feeling like he
was kept right at the appropriate Edge
for him through the whole time and then
being able to have a group of people who
is cohering and giving him a deep sense
of connection at the same time
um as well as right we have the nature
in which we experienced and he for him
because he and I had been friends for a
long time online but not having met in
person it was particularly powerful to
have me support him through that process
something he talked a lot about yeah
well and I mean John like like me we we
operate a fair bit in the abstract realm
and so yeah doing something that's more
uh
um physical more embodied and but also
aiming at something profound can imagine
that that would be a a different kind of
qualitatively deep experience yeah all
right and so that's had that's that
evolve move play yeah if people are
interested and what's the what.com
evolvemoveplay.com and so if people who
are watching are interested in following
up on this that's where to do it we're
running out of time here on the YouTube
segment of this discussion we're going
to move to the Daily wire plus platform
we'll talk for another half an hour uh
I'd like to walk through your
developmental history a little bit more
and and understand although we did some
of that so but we'll do a bit more of
that on the daily wire plus side so for
everybody who's watching and listening
like this
this notion that our physical embodiment
is the platform on which our Spiritual
Development takes place that's an
extraordinary important thing to realize
that all of that has to be integrated
and the bodily element of it is not by
no means trivial the notion that that's
elaborated up past internal integration
into the social world through play
that's an absolutely critical crucial
key realization I would say especially
if you're trying to do something like
revivify the child you lost when you
grew up right you ReDiscover that in the
spirit of play obviously the practices
that Rafe is leading people to adopt are
centered on that rekindling of the
physiological relationship and so on if
I find that extraordinarily interesting
it's so nice to see some of the concepts
that I was wrestling with 20 years ago
on the play front make themselves
manifest in in practice
um anyway so if people are into
interested evolvemoveplay.com that's
where you check this out and you can
follow us on to the Daily wire plus
platform if you're inclined and thank
you all for attending and listening
thanks Ray for talking to me today it
was extremely interesting and uh
um to the film crew here in where am I I
am in Saskatoon Saskatchewan to the film
crew here thanks a lot for your help
today guys and Rafe will head over to
the Daily wire plus platform it's been a
pleasure
good talking to you
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com